{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red84\green0\blue1;\red56\green110\blue255;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs32 \cf2 From: James Collins <jamesnc@stanford.edu>\
Subject: Re: [semprag-group] Potts and Levy on disjunction\
Date: 2015-03-29 at 6:01:17 PM PDT\
To: Christopher Potts <cgpotts@stanford.edu>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1\fs32 \cf2 Hi Chris, \
\
Some thoughts,\
\
- I find the following sentence a little confusing, probably because of its length. It says incorporating communication about language is a crucial feature of our language, but then what is the import of the Bergen et al references? I think the post-colon part of the sentence has too much going on and should be about three or four sentences for readability. \
\
"The crucial feature of our model is that it lets discourse participants communicate, not just about the world, but also about the language they are using (Bergen et al. 2012, 2014): the speaker\'92s intentions in production are characterized in terms of both world information and linguistic information, and the listener\'92s pragmatic reasoning is cast as a problem of joint inference about the speaker\'92s intended meaning and preferred lexicon (Smith et al. 2013)."\
\
- I was stumped by this for a little while, maybe "make salient" isn't informative enough of a term:\
\
" no matter what one\'92s initial view of the lexicon is, disjunctions like X or Y make salient a construal of the lexicon in which the disjuncts are semantically disjoint."\
\
- What does "holds widely in the lexicon" mean in the following sentence? It sounds like you're talking about tokens of HC violations (disjunctions in use), but then move to talking about types (lexical items). \
\
" This connection is anticipated by Hurford\'92s (1974) own analysis of disjunctions of scalar terms that seem to violate his generalization, and Chemla\'92s data suggest that it holds widely in the lexicon" \
\
- The boat example is a little confusing to me because it sounds like it's an example of the ad-hoc scalar implicature kind of exception to HC, but the paragraph starts out as if it is a different kind. But maybe this is an issue for me as a reader who is not aware of the difference between scalar implicatures and Levinson's I-implicatures. \
\
- 5e: I wonder if I can parse this as "We call this project VocaliD, or we call this project vocal I.D." which would not be a HC violation. \
\
- regarding point two of the licensing conditions (speaker authority), could I not say "X or Y" where Y is in some sense conceding that the hearer uses Y but the speaker doesn't, for example if I say to an American "let's take the lift, or elevator (as you call it)" \
\
- regarding point three, how can we judge that the disjunction cost must be small? If the benefit coming from point one (satisfying goal of communicating about their language) is very high, then people may utter something at a large cost. I feel like the final sentence of section 2 gives the right characterisation (or characterization). \
\
- Is it possible to get figures near where they are referenced throughout? Figure 2 especially. \
\
- I feel like the first paragraph of 3.1 is missing a sentence giving an intuitive characterisation of l_0, s_1, l_1. \
\
- In the sentence below (7), the contextual prior is P? \
\
- In (10a), can people not relay absurd messages?\
\
- I had trouble with what alpha and beta correspond to in the model. The explanation is in the last paragraph of page 11, but maybe it could include what one expects if the values are greater or lower? It does become clearer in Section 5.1, but its a bit of a wait. Could they have catchier, more transparent notations maybe? Especially in 5.4 \
\
- From the perspective of a reader who doesn't grasp all the math, I feel like the prose in sections 3-5 is rather accessible. I feel like I got the premises and how the picture all fits together.\
\
- Could an example of a real life situation be given in the prose of 5.4 which approximates the kind of context where beta is bigger than alpha and disjunction costs are low? And another one helping bring out the intuition of Figure 14?\
\
- I'm a little hazy about the parts where you ran the model again with very slightly larger lexica. \
\
- I like the final paragraph very much, it reads as very promising and exciting. \
\
Thanks for sharing, I learned a lot by reading it!\
\
James\
\
On 3/28/15 2:00 PM, Christopher Potts wrote:\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 Colleagues!\
\
Roger Levy and I have drafted a paper that we'll soon submit for publication in the BLS Proceedings:\
\
Negotiating lexical uncertainty and speaker expertise with disjunction\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://web.stanford.edu/~cgpotts/papers/PottsLevy_BLS41.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 http://web.stanford.edu/~cgpotts/papers/PottsLevy_BLS41.pdf}}\
\
It's not due until April 11, so we have some time to incorporate feedback. \
\
The model we propose is a relatively simple extension of models you might already know about. Nonetheless, we're sort of resigned to the paper appearing to be complicated. Any ideas for how to lessen this effect would be most welcome, though. \
\
We've tried to structure the paper so that people who stop reading at the end of section 2 will still hear all the empirical claims we want to make about the disjunctive strategies under discussion.\
\
We're also planning a related journal paper that will be experimental and focus on the exclusivization intentions and inferences that arise from disjunctions. Thoughts on how to go about this are most welcome as well.\
\
---Chris (and Roger too)\
\
\
_______________________________________________\
semprag-group mailing list\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:semprag-group@lists.stanford.edu"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 semprag-group@lists.stanford.edu}}\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mailman.stanford.edu/mailman/listinfo/semprag-group"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 https://mailman.stanford.edu/mailman/listinfo/semprag-group}}\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf2 \
}